Welcome back to the second part of this code challenge that we started from the previous video.
There's five exercises in total.
You've already done two.
And so now we do three, four and five.
But five is actually really short.
Okay.
Anyway, uh, now an exercise three.
We will begin with the path length analysis.
You are going to calculate the path length between each token embeddings vector from the current relative
to the previous layer.
And you're going to do this three times for each token, once for the attention adjustment, once for
the MLP adjustment, and once for the hidden states.
Now the hidden states vectors is what we calculated in the previous video or two videos ago when I introduced
this method.
So you can make a visualization that looks like this.
So there are three images here showing three matrices.
The rows of this matrix correspond to the transformer layers, and the columns on the x axis are the
token indices.
Remember, there's 342 tokens here in this text sequence, and the color corresponds to the path length.
So the way to interpret these plots is that larger values corresponding to more yellow colors depict
larger path lengths.
And that means that the vectors from the current layers are more distinct.
They're more different compared to the corresponding vectors for the same tokens from the previous layer.
So yeah, just to be clear, this means that the y axis here is not really each transformer layer on
its own.
It's actually a pair of sequential transformer layers.
So the data in row 15 is actually the change in the vector from layer 14 to layer 15.
Okay.
So here I'm showing what this matrix looks like for the attention adjustment.
And you will have to discover what this looks like for the MLP adjustment and for the hidden state.
Now is the time to pause the video and get to work.
We will continue working with these data in the next couple of exercises.
And now I will switch to code and discuss the solution.
Here I am looping over all of the tokens in the text.
And here I'm looping over all of the layers in the model.
And then you can see I'm extracting three pairs of vectors.
These are the attention vectors, the MLP vectors and the hidden states vectors.
In these two cases I have layer I versus layer I minus one.
Of course, for the same token and also for MLP.
Now here the code looks a little bit different.
And what is going on here.
Why do I have layer I plus one.
And here layer I instead of layer I and layer I minus one.
If you would like to take a moment to think about why that might be the case, feel free to pause the
video.
The answer is that remember that the hidden states actually starts with the embeddings the initial token
plus position embeddings matrix.
So that means that if we want to access the data from the first transformer block, we actually need
the second hidden states, right?
Because hidden states zero corresponds to the index, zero corresponds to the embeddings, and index
one corresponds to the first transformer block.
On the other hand, when I created these hooks, I did not implant any hooks into the embeddings vectors.
So therefore, for these hooks index zero actually does correspond to the first transformer block.
Okay.
I hope that makes sense.
So yeah getting all of the vectors.
And here I'm calculating the norms of the difference vectors.
And I'm storing them in this big data tensor called path Len for path lengths.
So we have this layer this token.
And then this third dimension 012 corresponds to the attention the MLP and the hidden states okay.
So that's very fast to run this code.
And now here I'm just generating the three images.
Okay.
So you already saw what this looks like here.
You see for the MLP and the hidden states.
And what we see is that in general across the board the path lengths are getting longer as we get deeper
into the model as we go up the x.
Sorry, up the y axis and they get really steep all the way at the end.
So the embeddings vectors are changing a little bit from transformer layer to transformer layer.
But as we get to the end of the model in particular right before the end.
So the last couple of transformer blocks right before we get to the final embeddings matrix, then that's
where, yeah, we uh, you know, there's like a big step change happening there.
So there's a big adjustment that's happening.
Uh, when the model is about to select the next token in the sequence.
Here is a question.
Which of these two adjustments, attention or MLP contributes more to the hidden state vectors the output
of the transformer block.
Now, that's not really a question that we can ask definitively or answer definitively and generally,
because it will certainly depend on the text, the token, the transformer layer and so on.
But we are going to run an analysis that addresses this question, at least for this model and the text
that we are using here.
So to run this analysis, have a for loop over all of the transformer layers.
And inside that for loop you want to run two correlations one correlation between the attention adjustments
and the hidden states vectors.
And then a second correlation between the MLP adjustments and the same hidden states vectors.
Here you can see what this plot will look like after you run the analysis.
Again.
Transformer layer is on the x axis.
Correlation is now on the y axis.
Now there's no data.
There's no results for transformer layer zero because all of these adjustments are relative to the previous
layer, so we can only start having data at the second layer, which is index one.
So at this first layer, the MLP adjustments are more strongly correlated, at least numerically compared
to the attention adjustments.
And the question is what does this look like for the rest of the model?
When you run this calculation, you want to get the correlation coefficients and also the p values for
statistical significance.
Annoyingly, the numpy correlation function does not actually calculate a p value.
So therefore you can use the Pearson R function which is in the Scipy.stats library.
You already saw in exercise one that I imported this function.
Now when you make this plot, you can also use different markers for the statistically significant Correlations
versus the non-significant correlations, and to know which correlations are statistically significant,
you will need to correct for multiple comparisons because we are calculating lots of correlations using
related data.
So for this you can use the correction method for multiple comparisons corrections.
That's what MCC stands for.
Again you saw an exercise one that I imported the F function.
And I've shown you earlier in this course how to use that function to get adjusted p values for addressing
multiple comparisons issues.
And then the final part of this exercise is to show some scatter plots over some of the layers.
So here you see one example from layer one.
So the x axis shows path length from the attention and the MLP adjustments on the same axis, and the
Y axis is for the hidden states.
And I'm plotting both of these scatter plots on top of each other in the same axis.
Now there are 36 layers in the model.
The first layer, which would be layer index zero, has no data.
So that means that there's 35 layers.
If you want, you can show all the scatter plots from all the layers.
For example in like a five by seven grid.
But I decided to skip every third layer just to reduce the total number of things to look at in this
figure.
Okay, the last thing I want to mention for this exercise is that I want you to ignore the first token
when you run.
All of these analyses do not include the first token.
I know I included it in a previous exercise, but for exercise four exclude the first token.
Okay.
And the reason why I'm stressing that is that literally the entire purpose of the next exercise is to
include that first token and see what happens.
So for this exercise, make sure you ignore the first token from the text sequence.
Okay.
There's a lot to do in this exercise, but I hope you find it enjoyable and a rewarding educational
experience.
I will now switch to Python.
Show my results and discuss what they might mean.
Here is the for loop over all the layers.
You can see that I'm actually not starting this for loop at one.
I'm starting it at index zero and I will explain why I'm doing that in a moment.
So inside this for loop we want to run two correlations for attention and the hidden states and MLP
and the hidden states.
I'm using the Pearson R correlation between.
You can see it's both the The path length from one to the end, which means I'm skipping the first token
here, skipping the first token here.
And remember I explained at the end of the previous exercise.
Actually, I can just scroll up here.
So I have this path length matrix.
This tensor of data has three elements on the third dimension zero is for attention, one is for MLP
and two is for the hidden states.
So therefore here I'm correlating attention with hidden states.
And here MLP with hidden states.
Okay.
And then I'm storing the uh r dot statistic from here.
That is the actual correlation coefficient.
And then r dot p value I'm putting into this matrix for the p's.
So I have the R's and the p's.
They are layers by two.
And of course the two is for attention versus MLP.
After this for loop is run, then we have all the p values, and then we can apply the FDR correction
to those p values.
So this is the significant actually let me run this and I'll show you what these variables look like
okay.
So here we get a warning message.
And the warning message happens because there's no valid data in the first layer.
So when layer I equals zero there's no valid data.
And that means that this value here is Nan.
And that's actually a good thing because when I visualize these data, matplotlib will simply ignore
the Nan.
And it's not going to appear.
If I had started this here like this, then because I initialized this with zeros, the first element
will be zero.
But that is an unfortunate value because a correlation coefficient of zero is a valid coefficient.
So we might get a confusing or misleading interpretations.
Okay, there are many other ways you could solve this, but that's the way that I chose to do it.
Okay.
I wanted to show you what this vector looks like.
It's just a bunch of trues and falses.
It is true where the p values are statistically significant when comparing or controlling for multiple
comparisons.
And it's false when the correlation coefficient is non-significant okay.
So that is one of several methods for correcting for multiple tests okay.
So here I'm generating the plot.
You can see I have three lines of plot for three plot lines for the attention and for the MLP.
So here I'm just plotting a line and then I'm plotting circles.
And it's going to be large circles where it's significant and smaller red circles where it's non-significant.
So here you see the non-significant values here.
Actually most of these correlations are highly statistically significant, even when correcting for
multiple comparisons.
Okay, so what do we see?
What do the results show.
Here we have the transformer layer.
So going deeper into the model and what you see is that the path length from one layer to the next for
the attention.
And MLP adjustments are strongly and significantly correlated with the adjustments in the hidden states.
Now that should not be surprising.
How do the hidden states vectors change?
They literally change by adding onto it the calculations, the adjustments from attention and MLP.
So if these correlations were all zero or negative, then that would be weird.
So it's not at all surprising.
It's kind of trivial that these correlations are significant and positive.
That said, what is not trivial is that the correlations for MLP are much higher than the adjustments.
The correlations for the attention adjustments.
Now, I'm not actually statistically comparing directly whether these coefficients are higher than these.
If you would like to do that I showed the method to do that, the formula and the implementation.
Several videos ago for that was a z test for comparing correlation coefficients.
So overall these correlations are significant robust and positive.
There's some weird stuff happening in here.
I think this might just be a little bit of noise and sampling variability, because the sample size
is relatively small for language model 340 tokens, all from the same text, just from one paragraph.
So I think this is not something that should be really overinterpreted.
Anyway, now for the next analysis or actually the visualization.
So here I created the scatter plots.
And here you really see that the MLP in the blue squares are really strongly correlated.
So the path lengths, the adjustments from one layer to the next in MLP is really tightly correlated
with the adjustments from the hidden states.
The attention is also correlated but not really.
Yeah, just not quite as robust.
Interestingly, you also see that the path lengths in general are larger for the MLP than for the attention.
So that that yeah, you see that there's a general rightward shift.
So the MLP path lengths.
So the change in the MLP adjustment vectors from one layer to the next are just in general larger compared
to the corresponding adjustments in attention.
And you also see that this really strong correlation remains positive up until the very, very end.
But it's a little bit weaker.
There's a little bit more kind of cloudiness here.
Now for exercise five.
This is an easy one because I thought you might enjoy something that's slightly less challenging after
the previous exercise.
In fact, you do not even need to write code for this exercise.
Just go back to the code for exercise four and include the first token.
So whatever you did in the code to exclude the first token in the text sequence from all the analyses
on the plots, now change that.
So now you have all of the tokens, and then you just have to rerun the code, look at the figures and
see what you make of it.
And now I will switch to code and show those results.
So this is pretty easy.
I'm just going to delete all of the ones over here.
Delete those ones.
and let's see.
That's fine.
Actually.
Wait, let me run that code there.
So here this already looks quite different for the attention.
So you do still see that the MLP correlations are strong and positive but considerably weaker at least
you know, visually noticeably weaker compared to before.
But the really striking impact is for the attention.
So here you get correlations that are hugging zero or around zero.
This one becomes significantly negative.
That is crazy considering that before it was like all the way up here it was around 0.6 or something.
So what is going on?
How can it be that literally one single data point out of 340 has such a huge outsized impact.
Well, I think you know the answer, which is that that first token is an extreme outlier.
And we can see that in the visualizations.
So again I'm just deleting the one here.
So now here's what these plots look like before.
And now here's what they look like with including the first token.
Look at this outlier way, way up here.
This is like a bajillion standard deviations away from the rest of the distribution.
That's entirely due to that very first token.
It is completely screwing up.
Uh, interestingly, not all of the layers, but certainly a lot of the analyses.
So what can you do about results like this?
Obviously, one solution is just to identify and ignore or remove from the analyses these extreme outliers.
Another solution is to use a Spearman correlation instead of Pearson.
Spearman correlation is based on rank, so it is robust to outliers like this.
I'm not going to show that analysis here, but if you are comfortable with different types of correlation
methods, you can actually just use Spearman.
Now this is going to if I would run this now create an error because I haven't imported this.
But actually, you know, I will show this.
This will only take a moment.
All right.
So let's see Pearson.
And I'm also going to import Spearman R rerun this cell to import this function.
And now I can go all the way down.
So now here I'm using Spearman instead of Pearson R.
And otherwise I'm not changing anything else.
So now I'm including the first token.
And then I go back to this plot.
And now it looks a lot more.
Not exactly the same as with Pearson, but it certainly looks more like the Pearson correlation compared
to what it looked like when we used the Pearson correlation, but included that extreme outlier resulting
from the first token.
Anyway, I didn't really intend to get too much into that, so don't worry about it.
The better solution in general is to ignore the first token and start from the second token in your
text sequence.
I really enjoyed creating this code challenge for you, and I hope that you enjoyed working your way
through it.
The attention and MLP subblock adjustments are not really strongly correlated with each other, with
a few noteworthy exceptions.
Now, that's not really so surprising.
The goal of the attention Subblock is to identify and gather appropriate contextual information and
load it onto the current token, whereas the purpose of the MLP subblock is to expand the dimensionality
of each token so that it can be transformed into a space that facilitates linear separation, grouping,
and classification.
And it's also kind of trivial that the attention and MLP sub blocks are uncorrelated with each other,
or at best weakly correlated.
If attention and MLP sub blocks did exactly the same thing, then they would just be one block.
Secondly, it is not very surprising to me that overall the MLP adjustment correlated with the hidden
states vectors a little bit more strongly than did the attention adjustments.
The MLP calculations already include the attention adjustments.
So by the time you get to the end of the transformer block, the attention adjustments have already
been like watered down a little bit by being incorporated into whatever the MLP layer is calculating.